.de Id
.ds Rv \\$3
.ds Dt \\$4
..
.Id $Id: blame.1,v 1.3 2005/06/30 10:58:42 foonly Exp $
.ds b \fBblame\fP
.ds i \&\s-1ISO\s0
.ds r \&\s-1RCS\s0
.ds u \&\s-1UTC\s0
.TH BLAME 1 \*(Dt "" ""
.SH NAME
\*b \- annotate RCS files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \*b
.RI [ options ] " file " .\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B \*b
outputs an annotated revision from each \*r file.
An annotated RCS file describes the
revision and date in which each line was added to the file, and the
author of each line.
.PP
Pathnames matching an \*r suffix denote \*r files;
all others denote working files.
Names are paired as explained in
.BR ci (1).
.PP
A revision is selected by options for revision or branch number,
checkin date/time, author, or state.
When the selection options
are applied in combination,
.B \*b
retrieves the latest revision
that satisfies all of them.
If none of the selection options
is specified,
.B \*b
retrieves the latest revision
on the default branch (normally the trunk, see the
.B \-b
option of
.BR rcs (1)).
The options
.BR "\-d " ( \-\^\-date ),
.BR "\-s " ( \-\^\-state ),
and
.BR "\-w " ( \-\^\-author )
retrieve from a single branch, the
.I selected
branch,
which is specified by
.BR "\-r " ( \-\-revision ),
or the default branch.
.PP
.B \*b
always performs keyword substitution (see
.SM "KEYWORD SUBSTITUTION"
in
.BR co (1)).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\^\-revision "[=\fIrev\fP]"
Retrieves the latest revision whose number is less than or equal to
.IR rev .
If
.I rev
indicates a branch rather than a revision,
the latest revision on that branch is retrieved.
If
.I rev
is omitted, the latest revision on the default branch
(see the
.B \-b
option of
.BR rcs (1))
is annotated.
If
.I rev
is
.BR $ ,
.B \*b
determines the revision number from keyword values in the working file.
Otherwise, a revision is composed of one or more numeric or symbolic fields
separated by periods.
If
.I rev
begins with a period,
then the default branch (normally the trunk) is prepended to it.
If
.I rev
is a branch number followed by a period,
then the latest revision on that branch is used.
The numeric equivalent of a symbolic field
is specified with the
.B \-n
option of the commands
.BR ci (1)
and
.BR rcs (1).
.TP
.BR \-kkv ", " \-\^\-expand "=kv"
Generate keyword strings using the default form, e.g.\&
.B "$\&Revision: \*(Rv $"
for the
.B Revision
keyword.
This is the default.
.TP
.BR \-kkvl ", " \-\^\-expand "=kvl"
Like
.BR \-kkv ,
except that a locker's name is inserted into the value of the
.BR Header ,
.BR Id ,
and
.B Locker
keyword strings
if the given revision is currently locked.
.TP
.BR \-kk ", " \-\^\-expand "=k"
Generate only keyword names in keyword strings; omit their values.
See
.SM "KEYWORD SUBSTITUTION"
in
.BR co (1).
For example, for the
.B Revision
keyword, generate the string
.B $\&Revision$
instead of
.BR "$\&Revision: \*(Rv $" .
Log messages are inserted after
.B $\&Log$
keywords even if
this option
is specified.
.TP
.BR \-ko ", " \-\^\-expand "=o"
Generate the old keyword string,
present in the working file just before it was checked in.
For example, for the
.B Revision
keyword, generate the string
.B "$\&Revision: 1.1 $"
instead of
.B "$\&Revision: \*(Rv $"
if that is how the string appeared when the file was checked in.
.TP
.BR \-kb ", " \-\^\-expand "=b"
Generate a binary image of the old keyword string.
This acts like
.BR \-ko ,
except it performs all working file input and output in binary mode.
This makes little difference on Posix and Unix hosts.
.TP
.BR \-kv ", " \-\^\-expand "=v"
Generate only keyword values for keyword strings.
For example, for the
.B Revision
keyword, generate the string
.B \*(Rv
instead of
.BR "$\&Revision: \*(Rv $" .
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\^\-date "=\fIdate\fP"
Retrieves the latest revision on the selected branch whose checkin date/time is
less than or equal to
.IR date .
The date and time can be given in free format.
The time zone
.B LT
stands for local time;
other common time zone names are understood.
For example, the following
.IR date s
are equivalent
if local time is January 11, 1990, 8pm Pacific Standard Time,
eight hours west of Coordinated Universal Time (\*u):
.RS
.LP
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'\f3Thu, 11 Jan 1990 20:00:00 \-0800\fP  'u
.ne 10
\f38:00 pm lt\fP
\f34:00 AM, Jan. 12, 1990\fP	default is \*u
\f31990-01-12 04:00:00+00\fP	\*i 8601 (\*u)
\f31990-01-11 20:00:00\-08\fP	\*i 8601 (local time)
\f31990/01/12 04:00:00\fP	traditional \*r format
\f3Thu Jan 11 20:00:00 1990 LT\fP	output of \f3ctime\fP(3) + \f3LT\fP
\f3Thu Jan 11 20:00:00 PST 1990\fP	output of \f3date\fP(1)
\f3Fri Jan 12 04:00:00 GMT 1990\fP
\f3Thu, 11 Jan 1990 20:00:00 \-0800\fP	Internet RFC 822
\f312-January-1990, 04:00 WET\fP
.ta 4n +4n +4n +4n
.fi
.RE
.LP
Most fields in the date and time can be defaulted.
The default time zone is normally \*u, but this can be overridden by the
.B \-z
option.
The other defaults are determined in the order year, month, day,
hour, minute, and second (most to least significant).  At least one of these
fields must be provided.  For omitted fields that are of higher significance
than the highest provided field, the time zone's current values are assumed.
For all other omitted fields,
the lowest possible values are assumed.
For example, without
.BR \-z ,
the date
.B "20, 10:30"
defaults to
10:30:00 \*u of the 20th of the \*u time zone's current month and year.
The date/time must be quoted if it contains spaces.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\^\-state "=\fIstate\fP"
Retrieves the latest revision on the selected branch whose state is set to
.IR state .
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\^\-login "[=\fIlogin\fP]"
Retrieves the latest revision on the selected branch which was checked in
by the user with login name
.IR login .
If the argument
.I login
is
omitted, the caller's login is assumed.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\^\-version "[=\fIver\fP]"
If no argument is supplied, print \*b's version number, and the version of
\*r it emulates by default. Otherwise emulate the specified version.
See
.BR co (1)
for details.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\^\-suffixes "=\fIsuffixes\fP"
Use
.I suffixes
to characterize \*r files.
See
.BR ci (1)
for details.
.TP
.BR \-z ", " \-\^\-zone "=\fIzone\fP"
Specifies the date output format in keyword substitution,
and specifies the default time zone for
.I date
in the
.BI \-d date
option.
The
.I zone
should be empty, a numeric \*u offset, or the special string
.B LT
for local time.
The default is an empty
.IR zone ,
which uses the traditional \*r format of \*u without any time zone indication
and with slashes separating the parts of the date;
otherwise, times are output in \*i 8601 format with time zone indication.
For example, if local time is January 11, 1990, 8pm Pacific Standard Time,
eight hours west of \*u,
then the time is output as follows:
.RS
.LP
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'\f3\-z+05:30\fP  'u +\w'\f31990-01-11 09:30:00+05:30\fP  'u
.ne 4
\f2option\fP	\f2time output\fP
\f3\-z\fP	\f31990/01/12 04:00:00\fP	\f2(default)\fP
\f3\-zLT\fP	\f31990-01-11 20:00:00\-08\fP
\f3\-z+05:30\fP	\f31990-01-12 09:30:00+05:30\fP
.ta 4n +4n +4n +4n
.fi
.RE
.RE
.SH "KEYWORD SUBSTITUION"
Strings of the form
.BI $ keyword $
and
.BI $ keyword : .\|.\|. $
embedded in
the text are replaced
with strings of the form
.BI $ keyword : value $
as described in
.BR co (1).
.SH FILES
\*b
never changes an \*r or working file.
It uses the effective user for all accesses,
and it does not even read the working file unless a revision number of
.B $
is specified.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B \s-1RCSINIT\s0
Options prepended to the argument list, separated by spaces.
See
.BR ci (1)
for details.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The working pathname and a separator line is written to the diagnostic output.
The exit status is zero if and only if all operations were successful.
.SH EXAMPLES
One day, there will be a whole bunch of useful examples here.  
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rcsintro (1),
.BR ci (1),
.BR co (1),
.BR ctime (3),
.BR date (1),
.BR rcs (1),
.BR rcsfile (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Michael Chapman <foonly@users.sourceforge.net>
.PP
Portions of this manual page are from
.BR ci (1)
and
.BR co (1)
by Walter F. Tichy and Paul Eggert.
.SH "COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE"
\*b is copyright \(co 2004, 2005 Michael Chapman.
.PP
\*b is released under the terms and conditions of the
\s-1GNU\s0 General Public License version 2.
Please read the \s-1COPYING\s0 file carefully.
